# Assignment 1

<5 points>

## Reading

Reading links are stored on our course's Teams instance.

1. [Basic Structure of Computers](https://cooperunion.sharepoint.com/:b:/s/Section_ECE-251-A-2025SP/EbAPAQKEWm5HrCgqFxJBcNcBoUJfJgyni2tLCI_XT3tB5Q?e=Hexhdg)
2. [Hardware Description Language primer](https://cooperunion.sharepoint.com/:b:/s/Section_ECE-251-A-2025SP/EcUcnqmsJz1IinxYnEzzFnABIQzUOs3jWoqTotSroQVq5g?e=eciNlf)
3. [Review of Digital Logic Circuits](https://cooperunion.sharepoint.com/:b:/s/Section_ECE-251-A-2025SP/EQWgBkDZ0MtIi-04QrdvtckB3P7NrNMeTZC6XINtIev9Qg?e=ka1eaN)
4. <optional, supporting> [Comprehensive Verilog Training Manual (from 2001)](https://cooperunion.sharepoint.com/:b:/s/Section_ECE-251-A-2025SP/ESMelOGGrkxDq6HG7O6ZjfoBmGLMV2yepKbqBskMm1oiNA?e=74Exnv)

## Software Installation

- Verilog
  - Follow instructions [here](../installing_verilog_locally.md)

## Problem Set

**GitHub Classroom Assignment Link:** https://classroom.github.com/a/GSFzh7kV

Write up your solution on paper then scan into a PDF or write in an editor then export to a PDF. Then add the PDF to the GitHub Classroom assignment repository. Remember to just add the GitHub repository to the Microsoft Team's assignment from here.

1. Convert the following pairs of decimal number to 6-bit 2's-complement numbers. Then perform addition and subtraction on each pair. Indicate whether or not overlow occurs for each case.
   1. 16 and 29
   1. -26 and 19
1. Create the module and test bench in SystemVerilog for the following digital circuits; you must use the [Verilog module template](../catalog/templates/module.sv) and the [Verilog test bench template](../catalog/templates/tb_module.sv). Each module will have its own directory. Therefore, for each module, you will also need include the command-line build files, as we discussed in class. <br>
   For Windows, [config.ps1](../catalog/templates/config.ps1) where you define your module name; [clean.ps1](../catalog/templates/clean.ps1); [display.ps1](../catalog/templates/display.ps1); and [makefile.ps1](../catalog/templates/makefile.ps1). For Linux and MacOS, make sure you install `make`, and you'll need this for each module [Makefile](../catalog/templates/Makefile), one in each module directory; don't forget to rename your module in the `Makefile`.
   1. 4-to-1 multiplexer, using gate-level modeling
   1. 4-bit decoder, using behavioral modeling
   1. 4-bit full adder, using gate-level modeling
